---
layout: post
title: Energy-Based Model (EBM)
subtitle: Deep Neural Networks (DNN) with Energy-Based Learning
subsubtitle: unified framework for  probabilistic and non-probabilistic learning approaches.
date: 2021-07-20
description: This post introduce energy-based model 
author: Anthony Faustine 
image: ebm.jpg
---

Despite the success of Deep learning for most practical problems such as computer vision, natural language processing, etc., the deep neural network uses a finite number of computational steps (stacked layers) to produce a single prediction. This pause some issues such as when the computed output requires a complex computation (complex inference) or when we need multiple possible outcomes, e.g. predicting video frames or when labelled data is not enough. Additionally, it is not straightforward how to deal with uncertainty in the prediction.

Compared to feed forard neural network, EBM  encode dependencies between variables $$(x, y)$$ by associating a scalar parametric energy function $$E_{\theta}(.)$$ to each of the variables. It learn to find if $$y$$ is compatible to $$x$$, thus $$E_{\theta}(x, y)$$ captures some statistical property of the input data. The energy score $$E_{\theta}(x, y)$$ takes low values when $$y$$ is compatible with $$x$$ and higher values when $$y$$ is less compatible with $$x$$.  To this end a feed-forward model is an *explicit function* that computes $$y$$ from $$x$$ whereas an EBM is *implicit function* that captures the dependency between $$x$$ and $$y$$.


The energy funcion $$E_{\theta}(x)$$  can be turned into a normalized joint probability distribution $$ p_{\theta}(x)$$  through the Gibbs distribution:

$$
      \begin{equation}
          p_{\theta}(x) = \frac{\exp(-E_{\theta}(x))}{Z(\theta)}
      \end{equation}
$$
where 
      
$$
Z({\theta}) = \int_{x\in \mathbf{x}} \exp(-E_{\theta}(x) dx
$$
      
is is the normalizing constant.
This makes EBM very flexible as you can use pretty much any function $$-E_{\theta}$$ you want, allowing for much more flexibility in the design of learning machines. Proper normalization is not required; thus, EBMs don’t have the issues arising from estimating the normalization constant in probabilistic models.  Furthermore, the energy function $$E_{\theta}(x)$$  can be parameterized by neural networks for a wide variety of tasks allowing the exploitation of the predictive power of DNN and the benefits of EBMs. This provides a unified framework for probabilistic and non-probabilistic learning approaches.


The energy $$E_{\theta}(.)$$ is used for inference, finding the values of y that make $$E_{\theta}(x, y)$$ small. As a result, the EBM model could be used for prediction, classification, or decision-making *which value of $$y$$ is most compatible with this $$x$$*. It can also be used in ranking *is $$y_1$$ or $$y_2$$ more compatible with this $$x$$* or  density estimation  *what is the probability distribution  conditional  or unconditional*


## EBM learning
Learning in EBM involve finding an energy function which assigns low  $$E_{\theta}$$ values to inputs in the data distribution and high $$E_{\theta}$$ values  to other inputs.  The log-likelihood of $$E_{\theta}(x)$$

$$
  \begin{equation}
  \log p_{\theta}(x) = - E_{\theta} -\log \mathbb{E}_{p(x)}\exp(-E_{\theta}(x))
  \end{equation}
$$

For most choices of $$E_{\theta}$$, it is hard to  estimate $$Z(\theta)$$. For instance, if the input is high-dimensional data such as RGB image with  $$16\times 16$$. Computing $$Z({\theta})$$ will involve summation over $$(256\times 256 \times 256)^{16\times16}$$ terms. As a results different sampling strategies such  maximum likelihood estimation, noise contrastive estimationas and score-based matchting has been proposed. In this blog we will focus on MLE with Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics (SGLD) sampling.

## EBM MLE Learning

In MLE, we seek to
maximize the log-likelihood function which is  equivalent to
minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence $$KL(p_D||q_{\theta})$$

$$
\begin{aligned}
   \frac{\partial  \log p_{\theta}(x)} {\partial  \theta} &= - \frac{\partial  E_{\theta}(x)} {\partial  \theta} +  \color{red} {\mathbb{E}_{p_{\theta}(x^{\prime)})}\left[\frac{\partial  E_{\theta}(x^{\prime})} {\partial  \theta}\right]}  \\
  - \frac{\partial  KL(p_D||q_{\theta})} {\partial  \theta} &= \frac{\partial  E_{\theta}(x)} {\partial  \theta} - \color{red} \mathbb{E}_{p_{\theta}(x^{\prime)})}\left[\frac{\partial  E_{\theta}(x^{\prime})} {\partial  \theta}\right]
\end{aligned}
$$
  
Since  $$\color{red} \mathbb{E}_{p_{\theta}(x^{\prime)})}\left[\frac{\partial  E_{\theta}(x^{\prime})} {\partial  \theta}\right]$$ is intractable, it can be  approximated through samples (Langevin Dynamics or MCMC). This objective function, will minimize the energy for data points from the dataset, while maximizing the energy for randomly sampled data points from the model. Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics (SGLD)   use  the gradient of $$E_{\theta}(.)$$ to undergo sampling such as
    
$$
\begin{equation}
\mathbf{x}^{\prime}_{k} = \mathbf{x}^{\prime}_{k-1} - \frac{\alpha}{2}\frac{\partial  E_{\theta}(\mathbf{x}^{\prime}_{k-1})} {\partial  \theta} + \epsilon_{k} 
\end{equation}
$$ 

where $$\mathbf{x}_0 \sim p_0(\mathbf{x}) $$ and  $$\epsilon_k \sim \mathcal{N}(0, \alpha)$$
It define a distribution $$q_{\theta}$$ such that $$\mathbf{x}^{\prime}_{k} \sim q_{\theta}$$. As as $$K\rightarrow \infty $$ and $$\alpha \rightarrow 0$$  then  $$q_{\theta} \sim p_{\theta}$$.

{% highlight python linenos %}

def sdgl_sample(f, x_k, steps=60, step_size=10, std=0.005):
    
    def f_grad(x):
        return -f(x).sum()
        
    for _ in range(steps):
        
        d_f_dx =torch.autograd.functional.jacobian( f_grad, x_k, create_graph=True)
        x_k += -step_size * d_f_dx + std * torch.randn_like(x_k)
                
    f.train()
    return x_k.data  

{% endhighlight %}
    

 
    





   


