---
layout: post
title: Technology Roadmap
subtitle: Technology Roadmap
subsubtitle: Enhance Your Road Mapping Process with the 6Ws
date: 2023-03-10
description:  
author: Anthony Faustine 
image: roadmap.jpg
---

## Introduction

Recently, I had the opportunity to complete a module on strategic technology and innovation management, which opened my eyes to a powerful framework that can revolutionize an organization's approach to planning for the future. This framework, called the Technology Roadmap, is a well-established methodology that has been used to align technology investments with business goals and objectives.


At the heart of the Technology Roadmap is the concept of the 6Ws - why, what, when, who, where, and how - which help organizations define and plan for their future. The "why" component of the roadmap sets out the overall purpose or objective of the road mapping process, such as a business goal or a response to market drivers. This is followed by the "what" component, which outlines the specific actions or initiatives required to achieve the objective, such as new product or service development.

The "how" component of a technology roadmap is perhaps the most critical, as it details the strategies, resources, skills, and competencies necessary to achieve each milestone or initiative. The "who" and "where" aspects are typically included in the plan details, while the element of time addresses the "when" factor.

By considering each element of the roadmap, stakeholders can develop a clear understanding of their objectives, the actions required to achieve them, and the resources needed to execute the plan successfully. This approach can help organizations effectively allocate resources, manage risks, and measure success along the way